docs(recipes): add Plugin or Service? decision guide (#1154)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: docs/recipes/plugin-or-service.mdx

---
title: 'Plugin or Service?'
description: 'Decide whether to extend a wasmCloud host with a plugin or ship a wasmCloud service alongside your workload'
---

This recipe gives you a framework for choosing between two ways of providing capabilities to a wasmCloud application: extending the host with a [plugin](../overview/hosts/plugins.mdx), or shipping a [service](../overview/workloads/services.mdx) inside the workload. The two are not interchangeable&mdash;each has hard constraints that rule it out in some situations, and softer trade-offs in the rest.

> ## What each one is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A quick introduction to plugins and services
```

Feel like we could use a more explicit title here

> A **host plugin** is a Rust implementation of the `HostPlugin` trait, compiled into the host binary. At workload bind time, the runtime adds the plugin's WIT imports directly to the wasmtime linker for each component or service in the workload, so calls from guest code dispatch in-process. `wash-runtime` ships built-in plugins for `wasi:keyvalue`, `wasi:blobstore`, `wasi:config`, `wasi:logging`, `wasi:otel`, `wasmcloud:messaging`, and more. See the [Plugins overview](../overview/hosts/plugins.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **host plugin** is a Rust implementation of the `HostPlugin` trait, compiled into the host binary. A host plugin is native Rust code that is available to and executed by components via calling into the host.

More concretely, when workloads are bound, the runtime adds the plugin's WIT imports directly to the wasmtime linker for each component or service in the workload, so calls from guest code dispatch in-process. 

For example, `wash-runtime` ships with built-in host plugins for interfaces like `wasi:keyvalue`, `wasi:blobstore`, `wasi:config`, `wasi:logging`, `wasi:otel`, `wasmcloud:messaging`, and more. See the [Plugins overview](../overview/hosts/plugins.mdx).
```

> A **wasmCloud service** is a Wasm component that runs for the lifetime of a workload, deployed as part of a [`WorkloadDeployment`](../kubernetes-operator/crds.mdx#workloaddeployment). Unlike regular components, services receive the `wasi:sockets` TCP bind permission, can listen on loopback and unspecified addresses, and are automatically restarted if they crash. A service exports either `wasi:cli/run` or exactly one WIT interface so the runtime has an unambiguous entry point. See the [Services overview](../overview/workloads/services.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **wasmCloud service** is a Wasm component that runs for the lifetime of a workload, deployed as part of a [`WorkloadDeployment`](../kubernetes-operator/crds.mdx#workloaddeployment). 

Unlike other components in a `WorkloadDeployment`, services receive the `wasi:sockets` TCP bind permission, can listen on loopback and unspecified addresses to interact with other components in the workload, and are automatically restarted if they crash. 

A service exports either `wasi:cli/run` or exactly one WIT interface so the runtime has an unambiguous entry point. See the [Services overview](../overview/workloads/services.mdx).
```

## Plugin and service comparison

| | Plugin | Service |
|---|---|---|
| **Form** | Rust trait impl linked into the host binary | Wasm component shipped with the workload |
| **Author language** | Rust | Any language that targets `wasm32-wasip2` |
| **Decision point** | Host build time | Workload deploy time |
| **Scope** | All workloads on the host | One workload |
| **Execution** | In-process (added to the Wasmtime linker) | Separate Wasm instance |
| **Shared state across workloads** | Yes&mdash;e.g. one connection pool or cache | No&mdash;sandboxed per workload |
| **TCP listen()** | No | Yes, on loopback and unspecified addresses |
| **Auto-restart on crash** | N/A | Yes |
| **Declared by workload as** | `host_interfaces: [...]` | `service: { ... }` |
| **Operator-facing toggle** | Cargo features on the host crate | Manifest field on the workload |

## Decision tree

![Decision tree for choosing a plugin or a service](./images/plugin-or-service.svg)

> The first two questions are hard filters: needing to listen on a TCP port rules plugins out, and needing in-process sharing across workloads rules services out. The third question is a tiebreaker that maps the choice to where the code should live in your deploy: with the platform (plugin) or with the application (service).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first two questions are hard filters: needing to listen on a TCP port rules plugins out, and needing in-process sharing across workloads rules services out. 

The third question is a tiebreaker that maps the choice to where the code should live in your deploy: with the platform (plugin) or with the application (service).
```

## When to choose a plugin

Pick a plugin when:

- The capability is **infrastructure**&mdash;storage, telemetry, secrets, messaging, a custom database driver&mdash;and should behave the same across every workload running on the host.
- You want **one resource** (a connection pool, a shared cache, a hardware handle) serving many workloads at once. Built-in plugins like `InMemoryKeyValue` do exactly this, keyed by workload ID for isolation.
- The capability needs to be **available to components in any language**, not just Rust. Plugins expose a WIT interface, so guests written in Rust, TypeScript, Go, or any other Wasm-targeting language consume them identically.

> - You **control the host build** and can roll a new host image to ship the change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You **control the host build** and can roll a new host image to ship any required changes.
```
